flesh out assignment docs (#6)
ggorlen/cs195-project: docs/SOFTWARE_DESIGN.md

# Software Design

## Project title and authors

Sokoban by Greg Gorlen

## Overview

Our proposal is to create an implementation of the puzzle game [Sokoban](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sokoban) in C++ that will be compiled to [WASM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebAssembly) with [Emscripten](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emscripten) to power a HTML5/JS/CSS user interface (UI).

## Technical Architecture

The game engine back-end will be written in C++ and the UI front-end will be written in browser languages, HTML5/JavaScript/CSS. Optionally, we could use a framework such as React or TypeScript for the front-end, but since the application will be small, plain HTML/CSS/JS without a build stage may be simplest.

> Unit testing will be performed on the C++ game engine code using [`utest.h`](https://github.com/sheredom/utest.h).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unit testing will be performed on the C++ game engine code using [`doctest.h`](https://github.com/doctest/doctest).
```

`-----------------`             |
                                |
................................|.............
                                |
.------.   FRONTEND (browser)   |
| User |                        |
`------`                        |
   |                            |
[click events]    [API calls]   |
   |                   |        v
   |   .----------.~~~~+~~~>.------.
   +-->| HTML5 UI |         | WASM |<--compiled backend engine
       `----------`<~~~+~~~~`------`
            ^          |
            |     [game state]
            |
            |
.----------------------.
| Jest/Puppeteer tests |
`----------------------`
```

Greg has built a simple proof-of-concept that illustrates the concept/workflow and relevant technologies interoperating: <https://github.com/ggorlen/wasm-click-counter>.

### Game engine back-end

The Sokoban game engine will consist of a top-level C++ class, `Sokoban`, which will expose the following interface:

```
// one of the possible objects that can exist on a cell
enum Cell {
   ' ': empty space
   '#': impassable wall
   '.': goal cell
   '$': box
   '*': box on top of goal cell
   '@': player
   '+': player on top of goal cell

> }

Reviewer 2: An empty space corresponds to a cell within the walls, right. Are the outside of the wall will also be represented as '  '. I was thinking of adding a graphical component in the negative space of the map. This is maybe for future consideration.

Author: Yeah, that's a good point. It's been awhile, but I don't think the typical level format has such a character: https://www.sokoban-online.de/sokoban/levell-format/. Looking at it again, I'll probably change the representation a bit here to match that better in terms of UDLR for moves/directions.

In any case, this should be easy to handle in JS with something like `board.replace(/^ +/gm, "X")` where `"X"` is floor tile and `board` is a 2d string (or iterate the rows of an array if it's an array and `replace` on each one) that's outside the board, then we can render that using a separate tile.

// one of the possible movement directions for the player
enum Direction {UP, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT}

> 

Reviewer 2: Do we have file that sets all of these variables. So we can just call WALL, PLAYER, UP, DOWN, etc without worrying about which ascii character they are being represented. So if we decide to change the directional button as (A, W, S, D) or the directional keys, we don't need to change our variable names. This is something the backend peeps will decide later on.

Author: I'll probably just change the enum to U D L R since that seems to be standard. The Cell enum can probably just be chars now that I've thought about it more, because looking at a level like this:
```
####
# @#
####
```
is much easier than 
```
{{WALL, WALL, WALL, WALL},
 {WALL, SPACE, PLAYER, WALL},
 {WALL, WALL, WALL, WALL}}
```
We could also use a `vector<vector<striing>>` possibly to represent all levels, since strings are mutable.

Author: JS will handle converting whatever keys we like into UDLR -- the game engine shouldn't be influenced by the UI.

Author: > File that sets all these variables

I should probably add that the Sokoban constructor (and/or a `set_levels` function) will receive the levels. We should specify some member fields for the class, probably `moves = "UDLR..."`, `levels`, `current_level` is enough. We're probably storing the levels in a file that a utility function will parse into the necessary format but for starters we can bake them into the program -- as long as the Sokoban class isn't doing I/O it's easy to change.

// attempt a player move in direction (up/down/left/right) and return true/false to indicate if it was successful

> bool move(Direction direction)

Reviewer 2: In this function, we will be checking if the tile specified by the direction is a wall, box or any impassable objects, then it will return false. Maybe we can save this impassable objects in a list to contain all other constraints that we may decide later on.

// switch to level level_number if possible, throw otherwise
void change_level(int level_number)

// reset the current level to its original state (could be replaced by change_level by passing in the current level number)
void reset()

// undo the last move

> void undo()

Reviewer 2: For this function, we need a string variable to append every move the user make and reverse the direction so we can utilize this function, right? So if the user entered UUDDLR. We pop R and convert it to L. Maybe we need a reverse(String input) function.

Author: Yeah, that's the general idea. I'd think something like `reverse` would be an internal or utility function if we need it. The goal here is to sketch out the public interface we want to expose to the API wrapper and ultimately to JS.

// return the current board position as a 2d vector of characters
vector<vector<Cell>> board()

// return the number of moves made on the current board
int moves()

// return the current level number
int level()

// return whether the current board is solved
bool solved()
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Will there be option to pause the game, return to main menu, exit the game, or jump to another level?

Author: > Will there be option to pause the game, return to main menu, exit the game, or jump to another level?

Pausing wouldn't be necessary unless there's some sort of timing component, which would probably be bothersome to implement and test and doesn't seem helpful for making the game fun. Main menu is a UI concept that the game engine shouldn't know about. `void change_level(int level_number)` in the C++ code will let us switch to another level.

> Should we add an incentive for solving the game?

We could, maybe as a stretch goal. Personally, I prefer the purity of just finishing the levels without messages and reward systems. But either way, it'd be a UI domain that the C++ game engine won't care about, unless the point system somehow impacts gameplay, and I'd prefer game mechanics like conveyor belts or ice floors first.

Measuring steps is a good idea and C++ can expose a function for it easily. But for multiple players, this would require a server web application, which is what Marv suggested yesterday. It'd be pretty easy to implement and I think it'd be valuable for the player and educational for the team, so I'm all for it, but maybe we should leave it as a stretch goal. That said, it won't impact C++ at all, so we'd need a new header for it.

Internally, levels will be a `vector<vector<vector<Cell>>>`, that is, a vector of sequential levels, each of which is a 2d vector representing the game board, with each cell being a character.

> 

Reviewer 2: Will the sequential levels be saved in a Directory containing files to corresponds to each level's map. Maybe we can save this in a hash table where the key is the level number and the value would be the location of the file we could read the map from.

Unit testing will be performed on the C++ game engine code using [`doctest.h`](https://github.com/doctest/doctest).

The browser user interface will be tested with [Jest](https://github.com/facebook/jest) and [Puppeteer](https://github.com/puppeteer/puppeteer/).

The turn-based nature of puzzle games and the HTML user interface makes it very easy to test our code, as opposed to a live action game on a screen where it'd be very difficult to programmatically provide input and assert on game state. Real-time graphics-based games can be math-heavy and asset-heavy.

There is a very clear separation between front- and back-ends, so we can delegate disjoint tasks and responsibilities. The back-end game logic can be written in C++ without any knowledge of JS (and could ideally be modular enough to couple with a command-line front-end that might be useful for development). Greg will mostly be responsible for linking the JS and C++ components together.

```
           BACKEND (game engine)

       .-------.

>        | uTest |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       | docTest |
```
